## Description

In this project, We'll apply the concepts learned in data modeling with Postgres
and build an ETL pipeline using Python. We will define **fact and dimension tables**
for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline
that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in
Postgres using **Python** and **SQL.**


## Files

<pre>
.
├── create_tables.py------# Drops and creates tables. Running this file resets
|                           the tables before each time we run ETL scripts.
├── etl.ipynb-------------# Reads and processes a single file from song_data and
|                           log_data and loads the data into our tables.
├── etl.py----------------# Reads and processes files from song_data and
|                           log_data and loads them into our tables. We'll fill
|                           this based on ETL notebook.
├── sql_queries.py--------# Contains all our SQL queries, and is imported into
|                           the last three files above.
└── test.ipynb------------# Displays the first few rows of each table to let us
                            check our database.
</pre>


## Data



### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song
Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON
format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files
are **partitioned by the first three letters** of each song's track ID. For example,
here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

<pre>
data/song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
data/song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
</pre>

And below is an example of what a single song file, _TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json_,
looks like.

<pre>
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
</pre>


### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event
simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the
dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from a music streaming app based
on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset we'll be working with are **partitioned by year and
month.** For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

<pre>
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
</pre>


If you would like to look at the json data within log_data files, you will need to create a Pandas df to read the data. Remember to first import _json_ and _pandas_ libraries.

```python
df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)
```


For e.g., `df = pd.read_json('data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-01-events.json', lines=True)` would read the data file _2018-11-01-events.json_



## Schema for Song Play Analysis

Using the song and log datasets, we'll create a star schema optimized for queries
on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.



### Fact Table

1. **songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays, i.e., records with
  page `NextSong`
    - *songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id,
      location, user_agent*



### Dimension Tables

2. **users** - Following information about users:
    - *user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*

3. **songs** - Following info about songs:
    - *song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*

4. **artists** - Artists information:
    - *artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude*

5. **time** - timestamps of records in **songplays** broken down into specific units
    - *start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*

In order to create these tables, all we need to do is perform some transformation in the data which are already in song_data and log_data directory.



## Process Song Data

We will perform ETL on the files in *song_data* directory to create two dimensional tables: `songs` table and `artists` table.

This is what a songs file looks like:
<pre>
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARD7TVE1187B99BFB1", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "California - LA", "artist_name": "Casual", "song_id": "SOMZWCG12A8C13C480", "title": "I Didn't Mean To", "duration": 218.93179, "year": 0}
</pre>

For songs table, we'll extract data for songs table by using only the columns corresponding to the songs table suggested in the star schema above. Similarly, we'll select the appropriate columns for artists table.

```python
song_data = df[["song_id", "title", "artist_id", "year", "duration"]].values
# array(['SONHOTT12A8C13493C', 'Something Girls', 'AR7G5I41187FB4CE6C', 1982, 233.40363], dtype=object)
artist_data = df[["artist_id", "artist_name", "artist_location", "artist_latitude", "artist_longitude"]].values
# array(['AR7G5I41187FB4CE6C', 'Adam Ant', 'London, England', nan, nan], dtype=object)
```

Now insert the extract data into their respective tables.
Variables *song_table_insert* and *artist_table_insert* are SQL queries. These are given in sql_queries.py file.

## Process Log Data

We will perform ETL on the files in *log_data* directory to create the remaining two dimensional tables: `time` and `users`, as well as the `songplays` fact table.

For `time` table we have `ts` column in log files. We will parse it as a time stamp and use python's datetime functions to create the remaining columns required for the table mentioned in the above schema.

```python
# filter specifies that user has played a song
df = df[df["page"]=="NextSong"]

# converting to timestamp
t = pd.to_datetime(df["ts"]/1000, unit = 's')
```

For `users` table, we'll extract the appropriate columns from log files as mentioned in the star schema above for `users` table.

```python
user_df = df[["userId", "firstName", "lastName", "gender", "level"]]
```

For `songplays` table, we will require information from `songs` table, `artists` table and the original log files. Since the log files do not have `song_id` and `artist_id`, we need to use `songs` table and `artists` table for that. The *song_select* query finds the `song_id` and `artist_id` based on the *title, artist_name,* and *duration* of a song. For the remaining columns, we can select them from the log files.

